# Realms of magic

Soon after the world discovered that there were people that could summon dragons and that gods could walk the earth, newsworthy info became anything that had to do with parallel, magical realms of existence. It soon became known that there were "pockets" of reality whose laws were more like a continuous magical effect. There seem to be two types of these alternate realities "floating" about. The naturally occurring ones and the human made ones. The ones made by people are complicated \(and usually rather dangerous\) acts of magic that require a special type of long term connection to the magician's psyche in order to stay alive. They are in most cases small in spatial dimensions. They also tend not to be dramatically different to the mundane reality that surrounds them. On the other hand the naturally occurring realms can be of any size and shape \(including multidimensional infinity\). They also tend to have laws that can be from almost identical to absolutely alien compared to the laws of our reality. Of course even the "non man made" realms of reality are considered by the Collective Unconscious theory to also be caused by people only acting in large groups and always unconsciously.

There is a continuum of how much a realm's space and time overlaps with our everyday space and time. This amount of overlap also denotes how easy or difficult access to these realms is. There are places whose space-time structure pretty much fully overlaps with the mundane one. One can just walk into on of those places without even realising it. You go about your business until you realise that the laws of physics happen to behave ever so slightly \(or very very\) differently all of a sudden. There are other places with some but not full overlap of space-time. If one finds himself in one of those places then he will experience space and time dilations and contractions in respect to normal space-time. These can be negligible \(a fraction of a percent\) or dramatic \(many multiples\). Imagine a house with much larger interiors than the space it occupies on the outside \(think Tardis\) or a prison where a year on the outside is 10 inside. Then there are places with very little overlap. Usually just enough to allow some kind of portal/passage to form between our and their reality. In more extreme cases such overlaps are periodic or appear only under certain conditions \(the door to whatever that can open only if -insert quest\). These places exist pretty much outside our space-time continuum \(mathemagicians would say they exist perpendicular to us\). That means that visiting them can take either no time in our reality \(think Narnia\) or can take infinite time. This is one theory as to why some realms have been known to only accept visitors but have never allowed any to return. Finally there are places with no overlap whatsoever with our reality. Those are usually accessed in two ways. Either indirectly through their overlaps with other realms with which mundane reality also shares some overlaps or through sharing the experiences of creatures that happen to be there \(live or recorded\). The infinite time contraction or dilation still holds for these realms of course.

## Magical Cosmology

