# The why of it: The main theories behind magic

## The four Groups

There are many theories as to why magic \(re\)appeared on the world and how / why it works. It took a good few years after the original events, for all the assumptions, speculations and theories regarding magic's inner workings to settle into four general groups of ideas. Of course each of these groups is been carried forward by a diverse but religiously fervent group of people pushing their ideas while simultaneously trying to pull everybody else's apart. These four basic theories are of course extensions of older concepts and philosophies. But now magic has provided for them a nice purple elephant siting happily in the collective room of humanity to point their fingers to shouting "I told you so". One of course can easily make a point about blind people pointing to elephants \(as long as it is not made in front of the more militant parts of any of the groups\).

## The God Principle \(and the Religions Incarnate\)

The earlier group that formed a coherent existence was, despite what everyone would expect, the "god is one" gang. Once magic was an established fact religious leaders from all the Abrahamic sects and religions started all of a sudden talking to each other, sometimes honestly, more often than not vehemently. They realized that times were getting a bit difficult. The automatic, time honored, behavioral patterns of finger pointing and "blame/kill the infidel" they always happily fell into when things got hairy were not helping anyone this time around.

So talks started taking place \(both highly advertised and dreadfully clandestine ones\) with one simple question; how was this going to be absorbed into the dogmata of the world's large religions \(and thus dealt with in a "convenient" manner\). A glimmer of hope appeared when the religious leaders after two years of negotiations announced a common press conference. They said that during that historic meeting they, as one, unified voice, would tell the world how magic was exactly part of God's plan \(and yes, there was still only One God in case anyone had started wondering\). You must have been living in a cave in Antarctica to fail to have seen the expected significance of this single press event. It was rather unfortunate for the more curious amongst us that that morning's appearance of the avatar of Christ \(in duplex\) and of Mohamed \(to be followed by Yahweh himself a couple of days later\) sort of put a stop to all that camaraderie.

It has been almost 30 years since the day that the world's religions got what they wished for. Living, breathing, \(and more often than not fire bellowing\) gods/godforms/avatars/god spirits \(or whatever you want to call them\). The jihads, crusades and all sorts of holy wars that have sprang in their name and by their hand are comparable in their cruelty and death toll with the large wars of the 20th century. Yet the core group of people that was responsible for putting together that "press conference of the Gods", as was later named, didn't give up. They felt that their work was now more important than ever and kept on trying to provide a commonly accepted \(at least by religious people\) view of magic. Their efforts have culminated to the publishing of "The God Principle" more than a decade ago. A sort of bible of bibles that puts the existence of magic and the appearance of god forms at its center. It's core dogma is that God has offered magic to humanity very much like He offered some time ago the tree of life to Adam and Eve; i.e. as a test. Magic, the new bible yells, allows man to create more easily than ever false idols. And of course all these spirits that call themselves gods are nothing more than exactly that, malign spirits posing as gods, there to tempt the little of faith. The question is whether humanity will happily accept the new apple or would they choose the path of righteousness and have nothing to do with that Tree of Life v2.0? Given the above stance the TGP theory assumes that the current laws of magic are 1\) God given 2\) not to be questioned and 3\) not to be used in any way. So the proponents of this idea do not really have a lot to offer to the debate about whether it is possible to extend the current limits of magic and if so, how to do this.

Surprisingly The God Principle is doing a very good job at being accepting and encompassing of a large number of faiths and traditions. Large numbers of Hindus \(at least from the ones that stayed behind in India\), Zoroastrians and Gnostics have accepted the TGP as their new Bible. This has not been the case for religions that put less emphasis on individual gods, like Buddhism and Shinto.

Of course there are also the believers of all the old religions whose Avatars are now walking the earth \(now collectively known as Religions Incarnate\). Obviously they are rather dismissive of the TGP ideas \(and of all the other RIs; no news there\). They hold a very firm belief that magic springs straight from their God spirit, given to their priests as reward for obedience. To explain the rest of the people who can yield magic, each religions has conjured up some type of evil spirit/satan \(often times also existing in the flesh\). This spirit, their explanations go, has somehow usurped part of the power of the real god and is offering it \(unknowingly\) to everyone who doesn't worship him \(or her as the case may be\). Of course at the fullness of time the true believers will annihilate the satan worshipers and regain magic for the themselves.

## The Simulation

It doesn't take a lot of imagination to visualise the mental torment of scientists around the world when they saw people with total disregard of the "laws of nature" bring down mountains literally with a single thought. It didn't take long for the more "spiritual" individuals of this group to gather around the idea of the cosmos as a computer simulation \(which was floating around since the beginning of the 21st century, thank you Wachowski siblings\). The universe, the idea went, was actually nothing more than a high fidelity simulation in some computer cluster run by an extremely advanced civilization. This is not aliens we are talking about. Aliens would also be part of the said simulation. These are creatures that for all intents and purposes have created and fully control our whole universe. Very much like the "One God" theory, but ever so slightly more tech savvy.

The extension of this idea, given the new situation humanity was facing, was relatively simple but intriguing to a large part of the human population \(at least to the ones with rudimentary science education\). At some point, someone, somehow had hacked into the Simulation. A part of the whole computer program \(i.e. a human or a group of them\) had somehow figured out not only that itself was a program but also how to tap straight into the machine code of the computer \(something like introspection in the old computer languages\). This person or persons managed not just to hack the code but to also insert their own malware/root kit into the system which allowed some of the other constructs the same type of low level access. Some say it was actually John O'Sullivan himself who then went ahead to perform the first series of experiments showing to the world how to access his malware \(i.e. how to use magic\).

The parallel theory that magic was actually the normal behaviour of the program, and something just triggered its overt appearance never caught on for some reason. This is interesting since there seems to be no agreed upon explanation as to why the simulations administrators seem not to have noticed the hack or done something about it \(like deleting the constructs with access to the malware to begin with\). Some people theorize that our time is much faster than theirs and the last 70 or so years have been but a few milliseconds to them. That has to be the case, some say, if the whole history of our universe has actually happened in computer time within the lifetime of the administrators. Some others say that the creatures who have built the simulation are no longer curating it so we are on our own until we brake it ourselves or the batteries run out or the program ends.

The main hypothesis of this theory on the actual workings of magic is pretty different to the other three theories running around at the moment. If magic is the result of hacking a computer program and if the hacking was human made then it stands to reason that figuring out the basic software of the simulation a bit better will allow us to change the "laws of magic" as they are understood at the moment. In all, the simulation theory assumes that the laws under which magic operates at the moment are a result of the way we are hacking the simulation. For example conservation of energy seems to still hold up in any magical act that has ever been performed. The same holds for the asymmetry of time \(you can go forwards at different speeds but never back\). The speed of light as the maximum speed in the universe has also not yet been broken. Yet the Simulation theory suggests that these are limits imposed due to the not so thorough job we have done at the core of the Simulation code and should not be considered as impossible to overcome. At heart the S theory assumes that Man can become the one God in the universe if He learns to fully control the software that is existence. There is still the question of course about which will be the specific man or men will that actually have that power but this is more of a social engineering and less of a theory of magic issue.

## The Collective Unconscious

The third of the four prominent ideas on the appearance of magic on Earth revolves around a hypothetical construct colloquially known as Collective Unconscious. Of course many more names exist\(ed\) for the same idea \(or ideas closely related to it\). Examples are: Akashic Records, Astral Plane, non-Relativistic non-Consciousness Interaction Manifold, but the concept remains relatively the same.

The theory assumes that all of the intelligences \(human and animal\) that have ever lived or will live on Earth have access to a non-physical plane of existence called the Collective Unconscious. The CU is outside our normal space-time continuum allowing the possibility \(theoretical for the moment\) of intelligences to communicate with each other over large vasts of space and even from different time points. Any communication though happens at a subconscious level so chatting with your future self to get the lottery numbers isn't possible \(information of any kind has never passed from the future to the past - yet\).

The CU theory further assumes that with concentration techniques which suppress consciousness and control the subconscious mind, someone can access this plane in a more controlled and directed fashion. So people \(and animals, aliens or maybe even intelligent machines\) can have a lesser or stronger communication with the CU according to the strength of certain skills and abilities they posses. The theory states that in certain cases the mental and emotional imprints of a group of people onto the CU can be so strong and copy physical reality close enough that the CU can in turn cause physical changes to the normal space-time phenomena. Actually the idea behind the CU is that it is a more basic level of reality to our physical realm and that it is there where the laws of the physical reality\(ies\) actually take form. One can imagine the CU as an arena where all intelligent life that has or will ever exist is at every moment in time chatting to each other. The physical realm is the result of a constantly shifting collective consensus between all these entities of how the reality they inhabit and experience should look like. This of course presupposes that intelligent life \(or at least non corporate intelligence of some form\) predates physical reality and is its generator \(instead of the other way around\).

The general rule of thumb of when occurrences of interaction between CU and physical reality can happen has to do with the total "strength" of control that a group of people \(or any other conscious group of creatures\) can assert on the CU. That strength can be roughly calculated as the product of the number of people trying to influence CU in a certain way with the capability of these people to actually cause any change.

The CU theory assumes that the Earth's population must have passed a certain numerical threshold at some point which caused the human link to the CU to become so strong that now physical reality can be manipulated through the CU in a direct way \(i.e. magic\). The point in time that this threshold was crossed is believed to lie between the times that two identical experiments occurred over the time span of about twenty years. The experiments were recording the electrical activity of the brain of the subjects while they were trying to influence physical reality while meditating. The point of the experiments was not to show that people could do magic but to figure out what was going on in their mind when they thought they were doing magic. The first set of experiments was done in 2038 using the then just developed full brain implant technology. They produced interesting results but as expected they showed that people could not change reality through meditation. The same set of experiments was repeated 23 years later \(2061\) but this time around they got some rather unexpected results. The first experimentally observed application of magic had just been recorded.

The CU idea has attracted into its new-agey bosom large parts of the non theistic religions and pretty much everyone who believed in magic in the years before it was shown as a fact of nature. Note: new-age was a sort of philosophical movement in the 20th century that assumed the existence of magic and matter mind dualism while bringing together a wild mosaic of semi-connected magical ideas.

## The Too Advanced Technology

Technology sufficiently advanced is indistinguishable from magic. Everybody has heard of that mantra by now. So the "Too Advanced Technology for people to understand" idea makes the assumption that humans have been given access to a bunch of technologies that are so advanced not just to understand but to even realize that they are using them. The two highly debatable \(i.e. rather sticky\) points of course in this theory have always been who are the originators of this technology and why now. Here there are two main sects of people. One group believes in aliens tooling up earth for some reason \(benign or malign remains to be seen but we can still go ahead and make wild assumptions, thank you very much\). The other believes in a human conspiracy of a way more technologically advanced group of people sharing their goodies \(or maybe a small portion of them\) again for who knows what purpose.

Trying to balance the scales given the rather vague statement "The Aliens/Government did it", the proponents of this idea are putting forward a number of arguments that are hard to contradict. One, the very basic laws of physics seem to be holding fast. Two, doing magic requires a large amount of training and hardship. If it was a test from god or a computer simulation hack, they argue, why couldn't it be easier and more disturbing of the truly fundamental natural laws?

The main concept behind the TAT idea is that there is somewhere on \(or in or around\) earth a number of machines that are able to move huge amounts of energy between any two points \(on earth\). This movement still requires time \(the speed of light has not been surpassed\) but as long as the magician pulls the energy from somewhere relatively close by, that time is negligibly small. These machines are able to tap into the fabric of matter-energy/space-time and transform any energy-matter form in any point in space to any other energy-matter form in any other point in space \(maybe within some spatial limits yet to be discovered\). Some people envision giant spaceships orbiting the sun or staying hidden behind the moon, or deep in the oceans. Some imagine a gigantic cloud of molecular size machinery spread all over the planet. Theories as to the nature of this machinery abound but everybody agrees that deeper probing in the workings of magic is the only way to get a handle on how these things operate \(or even look like\).

The magicians are though to act as controllers of these machines. They connect to them either through nanomachinery implanted in their neural systems \(unknowingly and only when they have trained their bodies and brains to be able to withstand such augmentation\) or through a wifi type of network covering the globe \(which can fry your brain if you tap into it untrained\). Of course no one has ever detected any of these hypothesized machines or mechanisms but the argument "they are too advanced" is hard to contradict at least for the time being.

## Metamagic and the subjectivity of reality.

So where do we stand, some people ask? Barefoot, on one foot, on a rock the size of a fist, in the middle of an ocean full of see monsters, is an appropriate answer. But metaphors aside, the question as to the validity of the four theories stands and for a small part of the population seems to be an important one. And here comes the crux. All four theories are designed in such a way to be on principle untestable. If God came down from heaven and told humanity that he \(or she\) had given magic to them, then the other three theories would happily absorb this event into their worldviews. Actually Gods did come down to earth and said exactly that, only to hasten the rise of a now global religion that calls them false idols and insists that God \(the real one\) would never stoop to such depths. The old physicists \(before magic appeared\) used to have a phrase to describe such ideas that never allowed for their falsification; not even wrong.

A group of magic scholars, trying to understand magic a bit deeper than the cataloging of cause and magical effect have resulted in a kind of subjectivity that would make a scientist of the previous 3 centuries suffer an immediate stroke. These guys \(commonly known as metamagicians\) are arguing that after all is said and done, the only logical approach to magic is the assumption that even reality at its core is malleable. Irrelevant if it is God, some collective realm, super advanced machinery or a piece of code, reality is not the constant, rules based, consistent creature humanity had come to know and depend upon. It seems that reality can be changed according to the whims of creatures who are but mere specks in its grand scheme of things.The circular paradox of such ideas has not escaped most of the proponents of the four basic theories. But in a world whose paradigm of reality is shifting right under its feet, people tend to throw stones in the ocean in the hope they will create something they can stand on.

