# The how of it: The main laws of magic

## What do we know \(and how sure are we about it\)

Over the past few decades magical practitioners have honed in on a number of rules \(call them laws if you want\). No one is sure if these "laws" have been there from the start or have actually arisen over the course of the time that humanity has practiced magic. Very heated arguments are taking place about their significance and permanence \(both in time, i.e in the near and far future, and in space, i.e. under the water, in space, etc\). For now most magical practitioners treat these rules as universal and apply a basic engineering approach to magic; that is, if it works it works.

### The basic rules

There are five laws that define all magical acts with a sixth one been currently hotly debated.

#### 0\) Reality as Monas with six facets

Reality seems to be expressed in the form of matter, energy, time, space, thought and chance. These "ideas" seem to be fully interchangeable when it comes to magic manipulations, one been able to transformed into any other. The current term to describe these six ideas as one is Monas \(meaning unity in Greek\).

#### 1\) The total Monas is always constant

No magical act can create out of nothing or annihilate Monas. That is any energy, any matter, any extra time, any extra space, any change in the way things are arranged or any thought generated by magic must come from an equivalent energy, matter, time, space, chance or thought destroyed somewhere else. It also means that any amount of Monas destroyed in a magical act has to reappear somewhere else. No one can destroy or create reality. There is a circular connection between these six ideas that make up Monas that describes how easy it is for magicians to transform one to the other. Matter&lt;&gt;space&lt;&gt;chance&lt;&gt;thought&lt;&gt;time&lt;&gt;energy&lt;&gt;matter. That means that if mass is destroyed then space is easier to generate rather than thought or time, but equally easy to the generation of energy.

#### 2\) Every magic event is a pair of source and sink

As a corollary of rule 1, there always has to be a single pair of source and sink of Monas. A source is the generation and annihilation of Monas somewhere in space and a sink is the annihilation and generation of exactly the same amount of Monas where the magician wills it in a way that causes the effect he wants. Of course both the source and the sink can have very different spatial extends but they always appear as unified regions in space. Also most magical acts are a complicated combination of both creation and destruction of different types of Monas in different amounts. The source will be an event that will destroy as much Monas as was totally produced at the sink and will generate as much Monas as was destroyed at the sink. Balance within the amount of Monas will be kept but not necessarily within the amounts of the individual Monas ideas \(matter, energy, etc.\)

#### 3\) The speed of Monas transfer is always c

The transfer of Monas between two points in space always happens at the speed of light in vacuum. Never faster \(and god knows people have tried\) and funnily enough never slower. The material in between the source and the sink of Monas is totally irrelevant \(which is not so in the case of light\). So one can send a light beam slower than one can transfer Monas from one place to another \(just pass the beam through glass\), but can never magically transfer anything faster than light.

#### 4\) The effect at the source side of the magical event is mostly uncontrollable.

Up to now no one has managed to control exactly what happens at the source end of the magical act or where that source actually is. That is, no magician can say in detail where his required Monas will come from and his excess go to. Also he cannot say what effect of generation and destruction of matter, energy, time, space, thought and chance this will create. A lot of effort has been put into taming this random aspect of magic with very partial success. A large amount of a magician's training goes to improve the ability to generate an as far away as possible and an as innocuous effect as possible at the source end of the magical act. This is a lot where magic becomes an art.

**4a\) The source effect is determined by the subconscious/soul/karma of the magician**

There is a huge amount of debate about this "law". Some people believe that the effect in the source is determined in a large extend by the subconscious of the magician. Unchecked desires \(even wholly unknowable\), strong feelings, persistent memories, tend to "materialize" in the effect the source produces. There is even talk of karma, etc., determining how benign or destructive the source effects are. This is very much a folk representation of "there is no free meal" idea combined with the "everybody gets what they deserve" belief. Some others believe that all this is a load of h.s. and nothing more than an effort by some groups of people to control who is allowed and who isn't to perform magic.

#### 5\) When the magician stops making magic, normal laws of physics take over.

While a magician is in the process of causing a magical effect then all sorts of physically impossible things can happen and stay in existence. When the magician stops performing magic then mundane reality takes over and any magical effects that cannot exist stops existing. But they do not just vanish. Whatever the magician has conjured finds itself been subject to the normal laws of nature. What takes place then has to do with how these laws cause the impossible to break down. For example a flying car will just drop but a 20 year old mouse will start getting old and die a year or so later. A pure ball of fire in the middle of the air will just pop out of existence. A ball of tar set aflame will happily keep on burning until it is consumed. A dragon, finding itself attacked by the forces of nature, can, depending on its "physiology" \(i.e. the way it was put together\) experience a number of fates. It can go on living happily ever after. Or it can explode in a volcano of burning flesh and bone driven by a highly combustible mixture of hydrogen and oxygen. Or it can just crash under its own weight spending the last minutes of its life choking to death as it tries to raise its lungs enought to breath.There are magical competitions where the magicians try to conjure both long lasting and extremely improbable effects.

### Requirements

Doing magic is something that requires a certain number of skills and aptitudes that only a small percentage of people are able to master. Yet on the other hand no discernible pattern has arisen \(to the annoyance of many\) between being able to do magic and sex, age \(in proportion to the amount of study required\), ethnicity, class and socioeconomic status \(again given the resources required to sustain an extended time of study\). It has also been shown that general measures like intelligence seem to correlate poorly \(i.e. have nothing to do with\) the ability to perform magic. Some people have again talked about past lives, karma, destiny, soul shards from heaven, etc.. Given the paradigm under which one approaches the existence of magic one draws their own conclusions as to what makes a good magician. Even the question "what makes a good magician" is becoming nonsensical since different paradigm approaches and different ways of doing magic will require dramatically different skills. There are though some common elements that seem to bind together the decent practitioners of magic.

#### Perseverance

Magic demands almost inhuman levels of focus and concentration. To reach those, one requires also abnormal resilience and belief in themselves, unwavering over very long periods of time. Most magicians have spent years of their lives in isolated study producing no or very little results with nothing to drive them on but their belief in themselves. The statistics are not in favor of a starting student of magic becoming a magician. Not even one in 1000 people who start the study of magic in a serious way will result in doing any kind of magic. Out of those, about 1% will eventually do magic that will not kill him or her \(or a lot of people around them\) the moment they conjure anything worth talking about. From that single person out of 100,000 wannabes only 10% will master magic enough to actually not cause any serious harm to other living creatures and the environment through the source effects he creates. These are numbers that everyone who starts studying magic knows about. So to persevere through the years of no results with that knowledge is truly a bigger miracle than whatever magic can conjure up.

The other side of the coin is that pretty much all magicians are by common standards arrogant, egoistical, self absorbed individuals with a sense of self worth \(which often they call destiny\) that can put to shame clinical cases of delusions of grandeur. Not a lot of people though have managed to hospitalise a magician on the premise that it is unhealthy for him to believe he is a god. That is also why magicians in general make very bad team players in teams not fully comprise of magicians. And that means in most cases they can't really hold down a "normal" 9 to 5 job for more than 10 seconds flat. They also seem to have a problem with authority \(other than their own\), resulting in the glaring absence of magical units from large corporations, and any kind of armed forces. The largest number of magicians in these environments are external contractors acting as individuals attached to some unit for sort periods of time.

### The difference between free \(high\) and spell \(low\) magic

Let's say you are given a model car to assemble. You have all the pieces and an extensive manual that takes you step by step through the process of putting the car together. You know nothing about model cars or cars for that matter. As you go through the steps you have no clue why you are doing what you are doing. In a "manual we trust" fashion you blindly follow through to the last step. If you have been careful at the end of the process you have a model car identical to the picture on the box. Any differences are bound to be mistakes that will have made the model car behave in a substandard way. The good news is that you needed to know nothing about model cars and yet you end up having one. Of course some knowledge on how models are being built is required, mainly to fill in the gaps that the manual assumes are common knowledge. But you definitely do not need to know how the combustion engine or the carburetor or the remote control works.

On the other hand lets assume you had spent the last 10 years of your life putting together and dismantling model cars, reading anything there is to know about them and about cars in general. When you then get the above model car in your hands, you have a decent look at the manual and then proceed to make something that looks like the intended car but chances are is better in a few ways and worse in some others. It probably also sports a few extra bits and pieces from your extended collection of model car bric-a-brac. The important is that you know what you are doing and you are in control of the creation process. That means that the resulting model is exactly what you want it to be \(and not what the manufacturer necessarily intended\).

The first way is the way of spell magic, also known as low magic. A magician can make a car for example appear out of thin air, fully functional and ready to go. He does not need to know how cars work or how they are put together. If he follows the car making spell in detail then the car will appear. It will also be exactly like the creator of the spell intended it. That means that it will also be exactly the same every time the spell is cast. Any deviations from the spell's procedures will more than likely result in mistakes that will cause the car to malfunction in some ways. But the magician does not need to be an expert car mechanic.

On the other hand if he happens to be an expert car mechanic and has some decent experience in car spells then he may not even need a spell. In this case, every time he needs to conjure up a car he decides how he needs it and then goes ahead and creates it. Every time he does so the resulting car will be different. No spells will be required and the magician will be free to improvise even to the general idea of a car \(adding capabilities that one does not necessarily find in cars\) and still make something functional.

Of course in most situations most magicians will be in an intermediate level of knowledge between expert and novice. In these cases spells are still required but on the fly changes can take place without resulting in catastrophe. At the end of the day though most magicians reach true magic level knowledge in a field only after a large number of those on the fly changes resulting in catastrophe. That is why magical training needs to be a lonely endeavor.

