# Basic ideas scrapbook

## Diceless system

The central idea of the system is to use no randomizer external to the game \(like dice, cards or arbitrary game-master decisions\) but still offer the feeling of partial unpredictability. Players should experience a game where most actions are not fully predefined but have a range of possible outcomes outside the control of any of the players \(including the gm\).

In order to achieve this effect the notion of historicity comes into play. The idea is that all of our actions and those of others surrounding us will influence to some extend our future actions and thus alter their results. I.e. life is complicated. In game mechanics terms the result of every action will be defined by four factors. One is the difficulty of the desirable result. The second is the player's total current ability given his skills, attributes, gear, and any other modifiers that describe his situation. The third is an average of the results of some of his previous actions as perceived by him. The fourth is an average of the results of some of his previous actions and the expected result of this action as he thinks are perceived by others.

The last two factors take into account the success or failure of previous actions. These are not necessarily related to the current one, other than by the fact that the actor remembers whether he succeeded or failed and has an idea how these actions where perceived by others. The number of previous actions that will come into play to offer modifiers for the current action is determined by the character's long term memory \(LTM\). So although characters with large LTM can recall small bits of info from way back they at the same time do not easily forget their past successes or failures which tends to get them stuck into spirals of success or failure that are hard to get out of \(what you would call a over-confident or lacking-confidence individual\). The second attribute that effects the outcome of all actions is the morals \(M\) of a character. Each character will have a number of beliefs as to how other people view his actions. Characters with a high morals rating will be very keen to act according to what other people \(the society, their family, a specific circle of individuals\) finds acceptable and commendable. These morals will add a modifier to each action according to how accepted a number of previous actions were by the target group of the character. Again that number is given by the character's LTM. Here by morals we do not mean "Do good" whatever that means anyway. Morals means whatever the social group most important to the character finds acceptable. A Viking society and a hippie commune will have diametrically opposed morals! But high M means that the character finds acceptance by the group very important \(some societies would call that honour\) while low morals means that the character does not care what others think \(opportunistic\). To make this a bit more concrete let's run an example.

Let's say that my character wants to stub someone. He is skilled with the knife \(knife fighting 6\) and he is pretty agile \(agility 7\). The other guy is wearing no armor and has agility of 5. Oh, and he is holding nothing so he defends with his unarmed combat skill which is 2. So we have my `6 + 7 = 13` against his `0 (armor) + 5 + 2 (skill) = 7`. Yet my character has a pretty strong LTM \(8\). That means that he remembers very clearly the last 40 times `(5*LTM)` that he did something that was not trivial \(he had to pay attention to it\). He has done relatively ok. He failed only on 17 of the last 40 times and succeeded the rest \(23\). That gives him a modifier of `23 - 17 = 5`. My character is also a member of a motorcycle club that traffics guns \(yes, exactly like the SoA\). He used to be very loyal to them \(morals = 7\). Because though he is involved with a girl that doesn't like the MC some of these past 40 actions were against the club. Out of the last 40, 25 have gone against the club's code, 10 were irrelevant to the club and for only 5 the club would pat my character on the back. That gives an original modifier of `-25 + 5 = -20`. Also if he succeeds on this stabbing the club will buy him a beer for sure. So his modifier becomes `-19`. Now 6 months ago while my character had morals of 7 \(loyalty to the club\) this modifier would have doubled to `-38` `(m=1,2 => 1/5*mod, m=3,4 => 1/2*mod, m=5,6 => 1*mod, m=7,8 => 2*mod, m=9,10 => 5*mod)`. But because of his girl's influence his moral are now down to 3. That means he gets a modifier of `-19 / 2 = -10`. So in total he scores a `13 + 5 - 10 = 8` against his opponent with `7`. So he manages to stab him leaving his writhing body lying on the floor.

