# Countdown to Extinction

## Three degrees Celsius.

A temperature difference so small one wouldn’t break a sweat over. At best you might lose some small item of clothing or drink one more glass of water and you might not even do that. These fluctuations in the environment don’t really mean anything as they happen all the time and we don’t even take notice. But think of the environment as a living organism and then you got a problem. Imagine if instead of 36.6°C, your body steadily operated at 39.6°C… Burning up 24/7 will surely wear you down if it doesn’t kill you eventually. Same goes for the planet but guess what? The planet doesn’t give two bits for the delicate balances that support the ecosystem. Ecology is like a big equation and if you change the input you can expect a different output whether it serves your delicate balances or not.

## Water wars

Sure, you lose your icecaps but that only makes more dinero for the megacorps who come to the rescue and make “EcoRestore” the third source of income in the World GDP. You lose some thousands in earthquakes but Bangladesh babies aren’t worth a western tear and Richter 8.5s only make LA skyscrapers dance the rumba for a couple of breathtaking minutes. Something to tell your grandkids over Christmas and reminisce semi-concerned about the odd Chicano casualty in Eas’ Los. You might have the Sahara move up to Italy and people now go sunbathing in Narvik but why shouldn’t the hard working north Europeans finally get the climate the deserve? Those lazy southerners couldn’t capitalize on this touristic goldmine when they had it any way. But lose both Ganges and Hindus rivers and you get 2+billion nuclear armed thirsty Indians. We are not talking about a few million hungry refugees fleeing from a war towards a better future in the west but a population bigger than the whole of Europe seeking permanent relocation. Apparently the “musical chair” game left the southern part of Africa standing alone and without nuclear weapons facing the second largest army in the planet. The next two years made Rhuanda and Aushwitz seem like droll understatements as the Indian Army “evacuated” whole countries for colonization. Africa faced a second more brutal wave of colonization and genocide while the west “strongly protested” enjoying cocktails in a terror free New York and Lager beer in a nuclear safe Berlin.

## “EcoRestore”

You will be amazed how much money one can make by repairing the disasters he made himself in the first place. The petrol companies that caused the eco-disaster since the late 20th century jumped to “assume the responsibility” of restoring the damage done and in the process make actually more money from this heist that actually peddling their filthy energy to a terrified world that would pay anything to ensure they could continue consuming like business as usual. The marketing pukes even made a politically correct name for this scam to make the world believe it might actually one day work. Unfortunately the scientists that make matter of fact arguments about the absurdity of the FakEcoRestore are systematically marginalized and ridiculed by the 99% megacorp-controlled media and the world keeps spending trillions in useless efforts to restore a dying planet. More practical and systemic changes could easily reduce carbon emissions and halt the global warming to a minimum. Only problem is that the megacorps stand to gain more with the continuing destruction of the ecosystem. Continuing global warming means more damage and more damage means more rebuilding and repairing and guess who comes to the rescue at no small price either?

## Aqua-cities

And the best way to make money is to totally control the environment so the choice was straight forward. If the surface would become a heated inferno and the way up to space was too expensive, the only way was down. Under water cities made use of slaves forced to work inhuman conditions just for sustenance. In these claustrophobic eco-shelters one might face a short life cultivating algae 300 meters below the surface but the food , water and oxygen are provided which is more than many unhappy billions in the surface can count on. So now the megas can actually charge for air and living space and finally surpass that little hiccup called “the United Nations Human Rights”. In this sinking Noah’s ark we call Earth, we huddle apart from each other like lepers alienated from our humanity and thus from felowship, only coming out like thirsty snails every night for a last doomsday party before the endless night.

